Somewhere on the path of life, a
person is lost. He will reach his destination. Just
recognize himself. Raise your spirits and desires will be fulfilled. Thoughts should be
high. Smile in difficulties. Know the
secret of Raj Yoga. Life should be easy.
Life should be
easy. Hello friends, Om Shanti. Welcome all of
you to our program, Zindagi Bane Aasan.
Friends, fear does not exist anywhere else; it exists
only in our minds. No matter what kind of
relationship it is, if you keep sitting in the fear of whether the
relationship will last tomorrow or not, then
you will feel that you will
not be able to maintain any solid relationship. But if
you rise above that fear and fill that relationship with sweetness, then
you will realize that no matter what the
relationship is, no matter how much distance there is, it will definitely be filled
and all your relationships will become much more
mature. With this beautiful talk,
we begin today's program. With
us is renowned psychiatrist Dr.
Avadi Sharma Ji. Om Shanti Bhai Ji. Om Shanti.
Welcome to our show. Thank you very much, Doctor
Sahib. We are talking about relationships. There are
many relationships which
we have dealt with so far. There are some relationships which are
formed after marriage, such relationships which
create a new world, whether it is with a
girl.  Whether it is for a girl or a boy,
what is your opinion about a girl who is
leaving the whole world behind and moving ahead in her life with one person?
If we look at our society,
in the last few years, the
trend of love marriage has also started, love
marriage which later becomes an arranged marriage,
or it is just an arranged marriage, that is, the
parents themselves find a groom or a girl for that person,
but still in most places, some
time is given to know each other,
even if it is just a single meeting, but
in love marriage, many times it also happens that among the
upcoming relationships, you
know someone, suppose you have a close
friend and you get into a love marriage with his brother,
and the other way around, so there, in a way,
you are first getting to know a relationship,
now that relationship is in a new form, the
family members are completely evolved,
in our society, especially,
marriage does not happen between a girl and a boy, it happens
between families or the families
want that they should also remain evolved and
there, many advices are given.  All kinds of advice come
because the intention is good; there's nothing
wrong with it, that two people can be
happy, but we don't want to hurt those two people in
whom we've been investing for a long time, whom we
know and love,
so if it's a boy, his mother feels this way,
or his sisters feel that their brother
or son is this way, and if something different happens,
they'll feel bad, so they try to
tell the girl who comes along, "Do this, don't do this, or don't do that." Otherwise, it'll cause
trouble. But because of that, they
want to live that girl's life through themselves. This is
especially true for today's
educated girls, who understand their own existence, who are self-reliant.
Many of them are doing
good jobs, responsible jobs,
or who have dealt with other people and
seen the world, they find it very strange that
someone is telling them how to live
an intimate relationship.
Correct, many times, people on the girl's side,
especially her sister
or her mother, become her partner.  There is a
very close friend who guides them as to
what to do and what not to
do, how not to lose their identity,
how to stand on their own feet, how to get their point across, how to
respond if the other person says something wrong,
etc. Now it becomes a
battlefield, armies from two sides are standing,
advising each other as to
what strategy should be adopted.
If we look at the marriage relationship, it is a
very beautiful relationship in which two
people together take a pledge to understand each other and
see the whole world from the same perspective,
and the most beautiful thing in that pledge is
that both should understand or understand
that both have come together from different places, from different
families, having grown up in different ways, and now they have
come together in a bond, so obviously it will
not be the same for both, correct, but the relationship is
so strong and because it is long, it is for the whole
life, hence they will be able to ignore small things,
and most couples are able to do it
too, but when the discussion starts here
that the sister-in-law says that you have to wear these clothes, she
likes them, or the mother
says that cook this food.  They will feel
good the day after and many times the boys also let this thing happen
thinking that the fight should not escalate
but then when one person starts feeling bad, be it the
wife,
mother or sister, then
that relationship cannot last for long. The
girl should understand that some
adjustment is required because especially she has come to a new
family, that family already has its own ways and customs.
If she gets used to those ways, then
she can strengthen that family and
can also improve her relationship and there should not be any hurry in it.
In today's time, somewhere or the other, this problem is
definitely arising that everyone wants that
all the adjustments should be done in 6 months or a year,
after which the rest of the life should be spent comfortably, but the
whole life is a process of adjustment
because both the persons are changing. There is a saying which is there
in English, you
can not step into the same river twice, both
have changed and both the persons are
also affected by the surrounding environment or the people around them.
They also
change with time. A girl still needs to be a
little careful about some things.  There is a need to
give a little more respect because you are dealing with the entire family
or this used to happen in my parents' house or
we used to do this earlier or no I will
not do this these are some such things which
can generally break families even if we are feeling some things then it is
not necessary to say it in front of everyone
suppose you found something bad about someone then it is
not necessary that you reply in front of four people at that very
moment and it becomes important
for her husband also that
he should also give her that much respect and if she does
not find something right then go aside and
talk to her and talk with respect
and do not create a fuss over every small thing
it also becomes important
for the husband and his family to understand that a person has
left his entire family and his roots and has come to
your house for you, it is important to
respect her in your house and make her a part of your family
and she might be
missing her family in the beginning it is
also important to give her the feeling of a new family because if in today's time
you help her in this  And if she feels close to you, then
she
can give that closeness back to you for the rest of her life. So, if you keep
these things in mind in this new beginning, give respect,
give closeness, ignore small things
and think that this is a long
relationship, some things will keep happening in it, do
not hold on to every small thing and do not hold on to old things, then the
beginning of the relationship can be very beautiful.
Yes, Doctor Sahib, many times it happens that
especially if I talk about the husband, it is difficult
for him too
because till now he is living like a free bird,
then suddenly a
person comes into his life who is
his partner in everything, be it
financially, emotionally or
physically, there are many things
which are going on simultaneously, in such a situation,
how should this husband make his wife
feel comfortable in that relationship, the
new relationships that are being formed in their life,
because we talk about the girl,
but many times the boy also has to make a lot of
adjustments, what should be done in such a situation,
see the case of a free bird  There is no nest
and when you think that now I have to
settle somewhere, then only after that a new beginning happens.
Yes, in what you said,
it definitely happens many times that some people are
forced into marriage prematurely either by their family members
or they do not like someone, still due to
other reasons they have to get forced
or they do not like someone and they like someone else, they are
removed from there and placed
with a new person,
there they definitely feel a bond
or if suppose they are
thinking that their career is
important and you tell them that no, this is also
important to go on the side, then they
feel a burden there,
but also understand that if it has happened then
you cannot deny that thing now
and if you take that thing in the right way, then the
other person, besides being your companion,
can perhaps reduce your burden.
But if that thing is given a chance, that
relationship is given a chance, see, a free bird does
not get a chance to talk to anyone every day, does not
get a chance to share its joys and sorrows, does
not
get a chance to eat food at home every day.  One does not even get a chance to
reduce the external pressures. One cannot get
all these things in a family, especially as a
couple,
and that is why there is a need to invest in it
because if one invests in terms
of time, in terms of emotions, in terms of
keeping the other person happy, understanding his difficulties and
solving them, then the relationship will last for a long time, not
just with you but
with your entire family. So, there is
definitely the husband, but we
generally learn that thing in childhood, we learn it in families,
and if it has been like this in families, it becomes
natural for traditional people to accept that thing, but suppose
20 years ago they saw in their family
that the father
suppressed the mother and her voice was not heard, then the same
thing subconsciously, even if they get educated, the
same expectation
remains correct, so it becomes necessary to change those things,
especially if possible, before marriage.
And if they can do it, then
that girl who may be a little small, who is going to a
new house, I don't know.  How will the new people
be? It is not easy to leave your room,
your childhood things,
your memories, your colleagues, friends,
parents, everyone and go to a new place. If
you uproot a big plant and plant it at a new place, it takes
time for its roots to develop. So,
if the husband and the
husband's family understand this, then the
girls appreciate it a lot
because they do have expectations
but they are definitely a little scared whether it will be fulfilled or not. Along with this, the other
family members should
also appreciate that a person has
left his home and come to your home, he should be
respected
and there is a need to show magnanimity there.
Along with rights, there is also a need to give love
and if you can manage your family members with
love, then you can also manage the new daughter-in-law who has
come to the home. Never
forget that if another girl has come to your home, then
your daughter will also definitely go to some other home.
So, if you look at it in that way, then whatever
we give, that is what will come back to us.
Here, the girl you are making
feel good, somewhere there must be
someone else who will support your daughter too, so
ignore the small things and
play the long term game. Think about how adjustments can be made in the long term.
How she spoke, whether she cooked on
time or not, these are small issues which are
better to ignore.
You are absolutely right, Doctor Sahib. There are
many relationships that are formed after marriage,
but if
we take time for each relationship one at a time and
give time to each relationship, as you said, as soon as you
give them time, things will automatically get better. At the same time,
some patience is also
required because this is not a matter of a day or two,
this is a lifelong journey. Of
course, we will pay attention and our audience will
also pay attention to this. Yes, Doctor Sahib, there are
some questions from our audience that we would
like to ask you. Absolutely, my
name is Rajni Gupta. I am a
resident of Mumbai. It has been five years since my marriage
and still I am not able to adjust in my in-laws' house. I do not get along with my mother-in-law,
father-in-law and the family.
What should I do for that?
How will one find peace when he is
crushed between his mother and wife? The
mother keeps complaining about her daughter and the
wife keeps complaining about her mother-in-law,
so the son is neither able to say anything to his mother
nor to his wife.
Doctor Sahib, his question is something like this
that it has been five years since his marriage, despite his best efforts,
he is
not able to create harmony in the entire family, there is conflict between the mother-in-law and
father-in-law and whatever their relationships are,
so he wants a solution as to
how he can bring harmony in all,
and the second question is something like this, there is
always conflict between his wife and his mother, so
in such a situation, he is getting crushed somewhere,
so what is your opinion, look at these two,
where there is a game of tug of war, if
one side lets go of the rope, then the other
side automatically collapses,
clapping can be done with both hands, somewhere or the other,
perhaps many times we do not even speak,
but our expression tells
that we do not like this thing.  Those
whose parents have just got married and are
finding it difficult, they
must be trying somewhere, that is why they are so
unhappy, but you can do only that much from your side,
you cannot guarantee how much the other person can respond to them, so do the
best you can from your side
and that includes keeping quiet at times,
ignoring things, not remembering what has already happened,
not holding grudges within yourself
and
not complaining about your husband and his mother again and again, right,
if this
tug-of-war game ends from their side, then other
people will say something but it will not affect them,
if they take something forward
but they do not say anything further, then things will start to
subside,
whenever pressures increase in a family, it keeps
increasing from both sides
and then it explodes suddenly, if
things are not taken forward then gradually other
people too will not be able to sustain it for long,
I would definitely tell them that there are some
principles of spirituality to
live an empowered life and they can learn this Rajyoga
through it.  How we have to make
a new beginning by forgetting the past
and why did this happen to me,
why do people say this to me,
instead of thinking that whatever happened till now was a part, a
part, now I should leave it behind and if I have
good wishes from my side then perhaps
happiness will come in their family, for that just do not
consider yourself responsible, do not
blame yourself, do not blame others
and many times relationships gradually get better with time,
definitely,
in many houses this problem is that the husband keeps on
suffering and he does not understand that if he takes the
side of the mother then the wife says that
you are the small child of the mother, you
cannot stand up for me and if he
takes the side of the wife then the mother says that you have become a
slave of your wife and you have
forgotten our relationship of so many years, if both of them are made to
sit separately and told that this is causing
pain to him, his mother is also suffering,
his wife is also suffering and the
children are also seeing what
his wife is
feeling in the future  Perhaps the same thing will happen
in that child's family in the future. Correct,
somewhere they need to move away from there and
tell both of them that if you
cannot improve your relationship then do not spoil it further
and both of them should be told that if it is a
small matter then you should deal with it among yourselves
and if it is a big matter then discuss it further,
if things escalate further then both of them will
not be happy, they may have to separate etc. etc.
So most of the people
stop there after understanding what could be the consequences of this. I
think both the mother and the wife
talk to them more to get their attention
and they want them to deal with every situation
themselves, fix it,
consider it responsible, it is a good thing but
relationships are so delicate that they
cannot fix it completely without the help of both of them
and after all if they are married then they have got a
mother-in-law as a gift and the
mother-in-law has a daughter-in-law in her house,
she has also got a chance to adjust, do
not let things go beyond control  Do
n't let them get out of control, but
slowly start adjusting between them.
Don't take anyone's side. Correct, Doctor Sahib,
you are absolutely right that sometimes we get so carried away in relationships
that we forget
that their control is also in our hands.
If we
take the remote control in our hands, we
can set any channel, be it a channel of happiness
or a channel of understanding. Thank you
so much, Doctor Sahib. Thank you very much,
friends. What did we learn today? Today we
learned that many times in relationships, there are
many conflicts going on. No matter what kind of
relationship it is, it
cannot last long. It does not have the strength to last
long. If we make a
firm decision within ourselves that we have to
change it, it is in our hands how we
deal with our relationships. Yes, sometimes it happens
that situations are such
that are beyond our control, but if
we bid farewell to the past and start a
new morning, then that morning will be very
pleasant. We end today's program with this beautiful thing.
And we will meet you again
in your show Zindagi Bane Aasan
Om
Shanti For more information contact
Zindagi Bane Aasan Brahma Kumaris Godlywood
Studio Shantivan Abu Road Call 809
Welcome Welcome Welcome Welcome Welcome We heartily welcome you We heartily
welcome you We
heartily welcome you The buds have
blossomed and are decorated The
door has blossomed The buds are decorated Those
who were
waiting have come The door has blossomed We heartily welcome you We heartily welcome you We heartily
welcome you The heart is filled with
fragrance By seeing you, the desires of the heart have been
fulfilled By
coming here yourself, you have come here
Thank you We heartily
welcome you We heartily welcome you We heartily
welcome you We heartily
welcome you The buds have blossomed and are decorated The
door has blossomed The
buds are decorated Those
who were
waiting have come We welcome you heartily welcome you We heartily welcome you We heartily welcome you We
heartily welcome
you We heartily welcome you We heartily
see the
festival of Lord Shiva  How did you
create this? Those who were separated from death were reunited with their
families.
Welcome with a happy heart. We
welcome you with all our heart. We
congratulate you with all our heart. The buds have
blossomed and are decorated. The
door has blossomed and the
buds have decorated.
Those who were
waiting have come to the door.